blog: add 2025 May monthly report (#1919)
iresty/iresty.github.io: blog/en/blog/2025/05/30/2025-may-monthly-report.md

---

> Recently, we've introduced several new features, including adding the `lago` plugin, adding the support for incremental API configuration updates in Standalone mode, a health checker for the stream subsystem, and a new Standalone Admin API. For more details, please read this month’s newsletter.
<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

From its inception, the Apache APISIX project has embraced the ethos of open-source community collaboration, propelling it into the ranks of the most active global open-source API gateway projects. The proverbial wisdom of 'teamwork makes the dream work' rings true in our way and is made possible by the collective effort of our community.

From May 1st to May 30, 8 contributors made 38 commits to Apache APISIX. We sincerely appreciate your contributions to Apache APISIX.

## Contributor Statistics

![Apache APISIX Contributors List](https://static.api7.ai/uploads/2025/05/30/0OnqOGTo_may-contributor-list.webp)

## Feature Highlights

### Add Metadata to Resource Schema

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12224

Contributor: [bzp2010](https://github.com/bzp2010)

> This PR refactors the resource schema to ensure that user-facing resources include a standardized `metadata` section with `name`, `desc`, and `labels` fields. This improves consistency and helps resolve issues in downstream projects like the embedded dashboard and APISIX's declarative configuration tool (ADC).

Reviewer: What's the "embedded dashboard"?

Author: APISIX dashboard, I think

### Add `lago` Plugin

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12196

Contributor: [bzp2010](https://github.com/bzp2010)

> Add `lago` plugin to allow users to use APISIX as a monetization gateway to charge subscribers via API consumption. It can be used in an AI cloud platform for charging by consumed tokens, like OpenAI and Deepseek, and for charging for calls to specified APIs, e.g., selling weather APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add `lago` plugin to allow users to use APISIX as a monetization gateway, allowing them to charge subscribers based on API consumption. This can be applied in AI cloud platforms to charge by consumed tokens—similar to OpenAI and Deepseek—or to charge for access to specific APIs, such as monetized weather data services.
```

### Support Revision in API-Driven Standalone Mode like etcd

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12200

Contributor: [bzp2010](https://github.com/bzp2010)

In standalone mode, APISIX's Admin API requires clients to fetch the entire configuration on every sync. As configurations grow or change frequently, this full-sync mechanism causes excessive network traffic and latency when applying updates. Additionally, frequent resource changes trigger a complete rebuild of the internal radixtree, degrading route lookup performance under high churn. In service discovery scenarios where upstreams are frequently updated, we aim to update only upstream data without impacting other resources.

### Support Revision in API-Driven Standalone Mode like etcd

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12200

> Contributor: [AlinsRan](https://github.com/AlinsRan)

Reviewer: Section duplicated with different contributor?

Author: fixed

In standalone mode, APISIX's Admin API requires clients to fetch the entire configuration on every sync. As configurations grow or change frequently, this full-sync mechanism causes excessive network traffic and latency when applying updates. Additionally, frequent resource changes trigger a complete rebuild of the internal radixtree, degrading route lookup performance under high churn. In service discovery scenarios where upstreams are frequently updated, we aim to update only upstream data without impacting other resources.

> ### Support Health Checker for Stream Subsystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Support Health Checks on L4
```

PR: https://github.com/apache/apisix/pull/12180

Contributor: [nic-6443](https://github.com/nic-6443)

> This PR added support for the health checker for the stream subsystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR added support for health checks when APISIX is operating as an L4 (stream) proxy.
```
